Is it Permissible to Invite a Gentile to the Passover Seder ? 1
Rivon Krygier
Question:
Rabbi, some days ago, I had 'observant' friends call me and invite my sister and her
partner for the second Seder of Pessah. The friend then wanted to extend her invitation,
and asked me if I wanted to join my sister. When I told her that my husband was not
Jewish, she told me that she was sorry, but could not invite him for the Seder, for "this is
the only Jewish celebration where non-Jews are not invited to take part." She seemed
surprised that I do not know this halakha. In fact, I do not know it. Where does it come
from? Where is it mentioned? At first I was understanding and simply thanked her, but
after a while I felt uncomfortable. What do you think?
Response:
There is a well-established halachic ruling which forbids inviting a non-Jewish person to
festival meals prescribed by the Torah, as opposed to those of Shabbat, where this is
permitted. [1] The reason for the prohibition is that the law authorizing cooking in these
days (in contrast to Shabbat) applies only for those who observe the laws of the festival,
which is, of course, is not the case with non-Jews. This is not the place to detail the
relevant sources. But we maintain that as long as certain precautions are taken, such as
cooking for all of the guests together (and not in separated utensils) - one would not
transgress the basic law.
These measures should be followed in order to remove all difficulties. But in fact, there
exist, in our humble opinion, major religious reasons which support inviting non-Jews to
festival meals:
1. "Mishum chinuch, letzorech mitzva" : for educational reasons, for the purpose of
performing the commandments" - allowing conversion candidates to initiate
themselves in Jewish practice. [2]
2. "Mishum K'vod Horim" :Respecting one's parents -- honouring a non-Jewish
parent. Many Rabbis have ruled that this principle remains binding after the
conversion of the child to Judaism. [3] It is hurtful for a parent not to be invited to
a meal because of his status of "gentile" [4]
3. "Mishum Kiruv" :To bring people close" -- This is applicable for both partners of
a mixed marriage. It is not right to refuse the Jewish partner the opportunity to
perform a commandment, just so that he holds to the prohibition. [5] It is
preferable to include the non-Jewish spouse in Jewish life, rather than to move
1

First published in: Quest, New London Synagogue publication, Vol. IV, June 2009, pp. 47-51.

1

