The Heart: A Passover Midrash
By Rabbi Sholomo Ben Levy

W

hy did God command Moses to go to Pharaoh and
then prevent the king of Egypt from responding in
any way other than with hatred and obstinacy? God
told Moses that his efforts to persuade Pharaoh
would be futile because “I will harden his heart that he shall
not let the people go.” (Ex 4:21) So, Pharaoh was not allowed to
change, evolve, or alter the course that led to his destruction.
The first question I had was why did God, in effect, make it
impossible for Pharoah to find the compassion in his heart
needed to free the Children of Israel from Egyptian captivity?
The second question was, what does it mean to “harden” a
person's heart? I researched this further and found references
of God “hardening” Pharaoh’s heart fifteen separate places
in Torah and once in the writings of the Prophets.1 This
midrash (lesson) is an inquiry into the process by which a
person’s heart is hardened to the point that it can not see
wisdom, feel mercy, or hear the word of God. It attempts to
teach us how to recognize a person whose heart is hardened
and how to avoid being a victim of this
punishment ourselves.
The Torah uses three terms to describe
the spiritual hardening of a heart —which means
that the humanity and divinity that resides in the
soul are restricted within that individual and are
not allowed to fully express itself. Thus it is
called hard. The most common word for this is
Kz-c= (Kazak) . Many of you may recognize this
as the word that appears at the conclusion of
every book of the Torah. In that context it
simply means strong and is placed there to
remind us that the more we study Torah the
stronger we become. Yet, in Exodus it is used in
its negative sense to mean hard, inflexible, or
stubborn. This is clearly how it is used in the seventh chapter
of Exodus where it says, “He hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that
he harkened not unto them; as the Lord had said” and also, “
Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto
them; as the Lord had said.” The statements are phrased to
show the fulfilling of prophecy; in other words, God said he
was going to harden Pharaoh’s heart and he did.
The second word, used less frequently in connection
with the heart, is hD3q= (Kasheh). It usually refers to hard or
solid objects but in Ex. 6:9 it is translated as “cruel” to
describe the slavery itself. In Deut. 10:16 and other places, it
is translated very appropriately as “stiff-necked;” as in stiffnecked people. But, this word is also used in Ex. 7:3 to
describe what God did to Pharaoh’s heart. It states, “I will
harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my sings and my
wonders in the land of Egypt.”

1
Exodus 4:21, 7:3, 7:13, 7:22, 8:19, 8:32, 9:12, 9:35, 10:20, 10:27, 11:10,
13:15, 14:4, 14:8; I Samuel 6:6.

The final and least used word is Xm-a= (Amats). In
Deut. 15:7 and I Sam 6:6, it is described as something we
should not do: “thou shalt not harden thine heart” and we are
warned, “wherefore then do you harden your hearts, as the
Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts?” However, like
Kz-c= (Kazak), it can have a positive connotation and is used
repeatedly in Deut 31 to mean courageous as when a person
hardens themselves against evil rather than against God. Thus
it is this word used in the familiar expression “Be strong and
of a good courage,” which is how I conclude most of my
correspondence.
Now that we understand the various words used to
describe the hardening of a person’s heart and have looked at
a few examples of it, we can now focus on why this occurs,
how we can identify it, avoid it, and cure it if we suffer from
it. God tells us that He has “no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will
ye die, O house of Israel?” (Ezek 33:11) Yet,
it appears that there are times when God must
make an example of someone who has
hardened his own heart. If God allowed that
person to have a “change of heart” once the
Creator began to inflect pain upon him, then,
it would seem that God is punishing him
unjustly. Thus we see that after a number of
plagues the pain had reached the point that
Pharoah agreed to let the Children of Israel go
free, but this was only a temporary change of
heart because God had hardened Pharaoh’s
heart so that it could not change sincerely or
permanently. In this way, we were able to see
through Pharoah what happens to a person
who bears hate and animus in his heart and refuses to give it
up.
Today, we see people around us whose hearts have
been harden by their own actions or beliefs. How can you tell
who these people are? And, more importantly, how can you
tell if your heart has been hardened? Typically, a hard-hearted
person is someone who refuses to empathize with the
suffering of other people; they are not sensitive to the feelings
and concerns of those around them; they thrive most when
they are insulting or attacking another person or group; they
believe that they or their group is superior to other people or
groups. A hard-hearted person can not reach out, he/she has
no desire to feel or create the love of which I speak. Such a
person always believes that it is the other man who needs his
heart softened. These are the classic symptoms of sclerosis of
the spiritual heart. We would be fools, in deed, if we believed
that our history makes us immune from this common
affliction, which in our society, is reaching epidemic
proportions.

1

