Passover
Modern-day Passover is
an eight-day celebration
that commemorates the
deliverance
of
the
Children of Israel out of
Egypt.
It actually
includes three of the
Feasts of the Lord:
Passover,
Feast
of
Unleavened Bread and
Feast of First Fruits.
During the time of Jesus,
this eight-day period was
called the Feast of
Unleavened
Bread.
(Mark 14:12)
The Passover and Unleavened Bread
Leviticus 23:4-14 These are the feasts of the LORD, holy convocations which you shall
proclaim at their appointed times. 5 On the fourteenth day of the first month at twilight is
the LORD's Passover. 6 And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the Feast of
Unleavened Bread to the LORD; seven days you must eat unleavened bread. 7 On the
first day you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no customary work on it. 8 But
you shall offer an offering made by fire to the LORD for seven days. The seventh day
shall be a holy convocation; you shall do no customary work on it.
The Feast of First Fruits
9 And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10 "Speak to the children of Israel, and say to
them: 'When you come into the land which I give to you, and reap its harvest, then you
shall bring a sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest to the priest. 11 He shall wave the
sheaf before the LORD, to be accepted on your behalf; on the day after the Sabbath the
priest shall wave it. 12 And you shall offer on that day, when you wave the sheaf, a male
lamb of the first year, without blemish, as a burnt offering to the LORD. 13 Its grain
offering shall be two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil, an offering made by
fire to the LORD, for a sweet aroma; and its drink offering shall be of wine, one-fourth of
a hin. 14 You shall eat neither bread nor parched grain nor fresh grain until the same day
that you have brought an offering to your God; it shall be a statute forever throughout
your generations in all your dwellings. NKJV
These feasts are in the first month of the biblical year, the month of Abib, which on the modern
Hebrew calendar is called Nisan. A biblical day is from sundown to sundown. (Genesis 1:3)
Passover is on Nissan 14 and it is the day that the Passover lambs were slaughtered by the priests
in the temple. Nissan 15-21 is the Feast of Unleavened Bread. The first day of this feast in

