Passover & Easter
by Fr. Luke Tran
Passover is a major Jewish feast that is most familiar to Christians. It was a
national agricultural festival and is a very popular family oriented religious festival
that is celebrated every spring for a period of seven days (in Israel: eight in
Diaspora) on the anniversary of the Exodus from Egypt.
Easter is the feast of the Resurrection of Christ which is the most important
Christian celebration. It is also called Pascha (Greek, ‘Passover’).
Saldarini in his book Jesus and Passover comments: “The Easter services refer to
Passover often because the Jewish Passover and the Christian celebration of Jesus’
death and resurrection grow from the same faith, the same ritual and the same
theological tradition. Jesus saved us as God saved Israel.”1
In this research, I will examine the similarities between Passover and Easter and
the idea of sacrifice and salvation found in celebrated holy feasts.

1. Origins of Passover.
The English term Passover derives from the Hebrew pesah, Exod. 12:13, “I will
pass over you … when I strike the land of Egypt,” while the Greek word pascha is
the basis for the English Pasch and paschal. “Exodus chapters 12 and 13 explain
that the feast developed from three separate practices: the Passover Sacrifice, the
feast of Unleavened Bread, and the consecration of first-born which were
originally pre-Israelite and unrelated to the escape from Egypt.”2 The animals were
skinned and butchered, so that certain parts could be offered and the rest of the
meat prepared (roasted) for the evening meal.
According to Saldarini, “Passover began as a spring festival among semi-nomadic
shepherds long before the Hebrew people existed and it endures as a religious
celebration of the Hebrews’ deliverance from slavery in Egypt within the family
and in the synagogue today.”3 Before the Hebrews are set to be free from Egypt,
God wants to punish the Egyptians in killing their first-born children and animals.
1

Saldarini, Anthony J., JESUS and PASSOVER, page 1.
Saldarini, page 5-6.
3
Saldarini, page 3.
2

1

