On Passover, family and friends retell the story of the Exodus of the Jewish people
from Egypt 3,300 years ago, after hundreds of years of slavery.
holiday insights

Happy
Passover!

Internal Pharaohs

Often we think of slavery only in its concrete dimension – being physically oppressed by an evil
tyrant, being imprisoned. However, there is another kind of slavery that so many of us experience:
the bondage to our internal Pharaohs. These are not wicked taskmasters who oppress us.
Rather, these Pharaohs are in our psyches and manifest themselves in many self-destructive
forms: low self-esteem, fear of the unknown, addictions, bad habits, and more.
By courageously freeing ourselves from internal prisons that lead us to despair about the
possibility of change, we are able to live healthier, more fulfilling lives.

Feeling and expressing gratitude

One popular song during the seder (service) is Dayenu (it would have been enough). But would
it really have been enough if, as the song says, G-d had split the sea for us but not led us through
on dry land? In his commentary on the Haggadah (story of the Exodus), From Bondage to
Freedom, Rabbi Dr. Abraham Twerski offers beautiful insight into this song’s important lesson:
“We must learn to be grateful for every favor we receive, even if at the moment we cannot
see its ultimate good. As we advance in spirituality, we should advance in acknowledging the
kindnesses we receive, and promptly express our gratitude for them.”

Compassion

Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, in his commentary of the Haggadah, talks about the Jewish people’s
responsibility to have compassion for the weak and vulnerable: “The Torah leaves no doubt
whatsoever as to the lesson Israel was to learn from this formative experience [slavery and
dehumanization in Egypt], stating it no less than 36 times: You shall love the stranger, because
you know what it feels like to be a stranger. You shall protect and respect one who is different,
for you, more than any other people on earth, know what it is to be different.”
continued on back

A Once-in-28-Years Opportunity!
On April 8, 2009, a rare event is celebrated by Jewish communities throughout the world.
According to the rabbis of the Talmud (Tractate Berakhot 59a), once every 28 years the sun
returns to the same place, at precisely the same time and day of the week, as it was
at the moment of its creation.

HERE COMES
THE SUN …

This confluence of events, a restaging of the heavens as they were at the
beginning of time, was not a moment to be overlooked by ancient rabbinic sages.
The next solar celebration marking this event, Birkat HaChammah (the blessing of the sun),
will occur on Wednesday morning, April 8, 2009. At the first rays of sunrise, the following
blessing is recited:

Baruch Atah A-do-nai E-lo-hei-nu Melech ha’olam oseh ma’aseh b’raysheet.
Blessed are You, O Lord our G-d, King of the universe, who makes the works of Creation.
Some people also recite Psalms 19, 121 and 148.
Even rarer than this once-in-28-years celebration is its occurrence this year on the same day that immediately precedes the beginning
of Passover at sunset on April 8. The last time the dates of these two special days converged was in 1925. Before then, there was a gap
of more than 600 years.
continued on back

